The Frog With No Teeth
Luis Fernando Macías Zuluaga (Luilli, 1982-86)
Translated by Valentina Macías


To my brothers
To my sisters,
To Mercedes' grandchildren.


CONTENTS

I Have a Frog
The Frog With No Teeth
The Ant Slayers
The Encounter With the Gentle Anna, the Sad Cricket, the Gardener & the Princess, & David's Dream
A Laborious Rebuilding. A Wedding Party
A Daisy in Love & the Swordtail Fish
A Return Journey, Two Lost Kids, & the Carrier's Story
A Paper Plane Is Born
The Frog Is Missing
Searching for the Frog With No Teeth
Don Ernest, the Master
Princess Love
The Sad Gardener's Tale
The Painting Professor
A Letter Is a Problem
The Frog With No Teeth Returns Home


I Have a Frog


Granny is young, has big eyes, and wears contact lenses. She says she sees very well when wearing her lenses; all things are blurred bulges when she removes them.
Granny is quite sophisticated; she straightens her neck while walking, wears lots of perfume, wears elegant dresses, and displays a courtly walk when moving.
She works all week long. With her upper teeth, she bites her lower lip. She speaks on the phone while sitting in her office; she works on the phone or visits clients.

On Saturdays, she goes to her farm in the morning. The farm is in Rionegro. And there's a pond on the farm. And little swordtail fishes are in the pond with tadpoles, frogs, and toads. The frogs sing, and the toads sing. There's a bridge in the pond. Frogs and toads that croak. There are primroses around the pond and, next to it, a bamboo forest.

Before, there was a ravine, no lake, and no bamboo; there were no spider plants, primroses, or ferns, but there were frogs. And Granny had a hole dug, and the gap got filled with water. Into the water, they put goldfish and little swordtails. The goldfish were gone, but the swordtails were not; Granny planted many plants, and David likes frogs.

Granny wears jeans on Saturdays, grabs a pair of scissors, and strolls with David to the pond. She cuts the dried branches with scissors while David listens to the frogs croaking.

'The frogs are contented,' says Granny.

'Do frogs speak?' David asked.

'Frogs speak.'

'And do fishes speak?'

'All things speak.'

'I have a frog,' said David.


The Frog With No Teeth


Mom told David:

'I'm going to buy you shoes.' They looked up at the sky and saw it would be a rainy day, but Mom said:

'Bah!'

Also, Granny said:

'It should begin raining soon.'

Again, Mom said:

"Bah!"

So, off they went to Rionegro town and bought shoes.

In Rionegro, the shoes were packed in a cloth bag. However, it was not just a bag but a frog-shaped rucksack.
David wore his new shoes and took his frog with him. He walked towards the dining table and told Dad:

'I have red shoes.'

Dad placed his book down on the table.

'I also have a frog.'

'Let me see it.'

'Look.'
Dad looked at the frog and said:

'Give it to me; you'll see.'

David leaned closer, stretching his hand so Dad could grab the frog.

Dad took the rucksack frog and stuck his hand inside it. He then kept it inside the black ruana he wore, and the frog appeared next to Dad's neck.

'David, say hello to the tiny frog.'

'What's up, Frog!'

'What's up, David!' the frog replied, and it was the first time in its life that it had spoken.

David opened his eyes and sat down attentively. He could not believe the frog was alive and speaking to him with such a tiny voice, which sounded much like Dad's.

'Hey, Froggy...,' said David.

'What?'

'Do you speak?'

'Yes. I speak.'

'Is she 'really' speaking?' David asked Dad.

'Yes. The frog is speaking.'

David heard Dad's deep and vigorous voice and got that it differed from the frog's tinny voice.

'And do you have a mouth?'

'Yes, I have a mouth.'

'Her mouth is red, just like my shoes!'

'My mouth is even redder,' the frog argued.

Dad slanted down so the frog could come close to David, but David felt scared and was about to weep.

'Don't cry,' the frog pleaded. 'Why would you? Please, don't fear me.'

'You won't do nothing?'

'No, I will not hurt you.'

David felt somewhat relieved.

'Come here!' Dad said.

David stepped closer to the frog and, feeling somewhat afraid still, tried to touch it. The frog grabbed his hand with its red mouth. David saw it wouldn't harm him and laughed.

'She has no teeth!' he exclaimed.

'I'm with no teeth,' the frog said.


The Ant Slayers


                    "(. . .) 'I eat dreams,' the tinny voice replied. 'At night, when kids fall asleep, I approach their beds flying' (. . .)"

'Why do rucksack frogs have no teeth?' David asked Dad.

'Because they don't need to eat to get strong; they are in this world to tell stories, to invent dreams and games.'

'Froggy, what do you eat?'

'I eat dreams,' replied the tinny voice. 'At night, as kids lay down to sleep, I approach their beds flying, and to all, one by one, I blow into their eyes, so they close them up and fall asleep, then they start dreaming, and I begin eating their dreams as they leave their heads. Hmmm, kids' dreams taste good, ha-ha!'

The frog laughed and savored while reminiscing about the delicious dreams of cakes, chocolate cities, and coconut-raisin ice cream.
David caught the frog's laughter and started laughing too. And because his glasses had fallen off, he readjusted them.

'Listen up, Frog!' Dad's deep voice spoke. 'Tell David one of your stories.'

'Would you want to hear a tale?'

'Yes.'

Dad rearranged his hand by sticking it up so that the frog's head could stand out, and the frog started to say:
Once, there were two kids; the eight-year-old was Juan Diego, and Federico was five. Their complex had yellow buildings with yards and sidewalks next to The Miraculous Church.'

'Let's kill ants!' suggested Juan Diego.

'Ok. Let's kill lots of ants!'

Federico entered their parents' bedroom, climbed onto their bed to cross over to the other side, opened the nightstand drawer, and took out a matchbox.

'Let's bring paper!'

They went to the closet together and took out several pages of old newspapers.
Juan Diego opened the front door to go out, and their mom, who was in the kitchen peeling potatoes, asked them:

'Where are you going?'

'We're going to kill ants,' Federico replied.

'Okay, but don't take too long or go too far because lunch will be ready soon.'

They went down the stairs carrying the newspapers. Federico was holding the matchbox inside his pocket. When they reached the first floor, Juan Diego put the papers next to the main door to keep it open and let his brother out.

When they got to the lawn, Juan Diego said:

'There! An anthill: I saw it; there it is, there it is.'

They crossed the eucalyptus row and climbed down along the rocks. Before reaching the fence, they came across an enormous anthill.

'There, there!' Juan Diego shouted.

He dropped the newspapers, applauded, stamped his feet against the floor, and laughed as their time to kill many ants arrived.
For everyone inside the anthill, it was a hard day's work. A crowd of workers was picking up clods and transporting them from side to side. They were building labyrinths, storerooms, and passages. A line of soldiers walked in carrying leaves, pieces of insects, and breadcrumbs brought from the dustbin on the creek's bank. Suddenly, an ant that had stopped on a rock to breathe some air saw the boys approaching the nest, holding newspapers.

'They're going to kill us!' the ant said, dropping the leaf she carried.

Then, she took half a turn to touch the colleague's antenna behind her to tell her the news. This one, in turn, said to the next, and that one, to the next, and so on, in such a way that, in as short as an instant, the news propagated from antenna to antenna until the queen had heard all about it.

'Stop all duties!' She ordered. 'Prepare the army! Sharpen your stings! Send out a team of soldiers to fight against the invaders and for the rest of the colony: come down to earth and into the security room!' the queen of ants shouted out orders fast while preparing to flee.

At once, a group of young and vigorous ants started running to the surface. The rest dipped down after the queen.
Meanwhile, Juan Diego had set a piece of paper on fire and began burning the ants.

'Let's step on them!' Federico said, trampling his foot upon the thin construction of sand.

At that time, the defense squad had managed to hold onto his shoe and began to climb it.
Juan Diego also wanted to step on them before setting up the fire, and another squadron succeeded at climbing on his shoe.
Once the roads were closed, the ants ran from side to side, not finding a way out, and the kids brought the newspapers closer to the anthill.
'More paper, pass me more paper!' Juan Diego shouted, and Federico kept placing more sheets onto the fire.

The defense squad climbed the socks and found the kids' skin.

'Ouch! Damn it! They're stinging me!' Juan Diego shouted as he slapped his legs to shake the ants off him.

David began laughing so much that he had to sit on the floor to laugh a little more.

'Wait!' Dad said. 'The tale isn't over yet; it just started.'


The Encounter with the Gentle Anna, the Sad Cricket, the Gardener, & the Princess, & David's Dream


"They kept walking. The cricket's chirping
was getting closer and closer.
 Suddenly, they felt a fluttering,
and the grass leaves moved uproariously,
and an enormous green animal fell next to them."


Right then, Mom came, and the story had to be suspended for a long time; meanwhile, they brushed their teeth, and David wore his pajamas.
Once inside the covers, Dad sat beside him with the frog sticking out his ruana.

'Froggy,' David said. 'Keep on going.'

The frog continued:

When Juan Diego and Federico got stung by the ants' defense squad, Federico looked at Juan Diego and told him:

'Oh, my dear, that tree is growing a lot.'

Juan Diego shook off the last of the ants; after checking all over himself and looking after Federico, he replied:

'Oh, oh, oh!... You're becoming smaller.'

'So are you,' Federico said, and in the twinkling of an eye, they were the size of an ant.

They looked up and saw the leaves of grass as large trees rising towards the sky, full of trunks.
Federico suddenly realized that Juan Diego was far from him, on top of a clod, next to a leaf so high up that its tip couldn't be seen.

'Federico!' Juan Diego shouted from the cold, and Federico began to run towards him.

Standing beside him, he saw Juan Diego stepping down from the leaf logs as if going down a stairway.

'Ay ay ay!'... Juan Diego expressed. 'We're lost in the forest, my dear; remember Mom told us not to go far away because she would soon serve us lunch.'

'Hm… let's run and see if we get home.'

They held their hands and started walking through the woods, where everything was gigantic. Suddenly, in between the grass blades, they saw in the distance a horrible monster wallowing on the floor.

'Watch out!' Juan Diego warned. 'Let's hideout to see what it is.'

They hid behind a rock to see from there. The animal's body was divided into three parts: a head with two pincers, which open and close permanently, and two long and flexible antennae on each side of its eyes. The trunk, smaller than the head, had three pairs of long, thin legs, and the body ended in a butt, much bigger than the head, with a sting on the tip.
They saw how it recovered and started walking.

'It's not a monster!' Federico said. 'It's one of the ants that stunt us. It's because we're small as ants.'

'Let's go up to her,' Juan Diego proposed.

'Yes, let's go.'

They ran to catch up to the ant that was in a hurry.

'Anty, anty,' Juan Diego called the Ant.

The Ant turned around.

'What's happening?' She asked back.

'Wait for us; we want to talk to you.'

'Who are you?'

'We are the kids who were burning you,' Federico commented. 'It so happened that we turned small, very small, and got lost, but we should get back home because our mom was about to have lunch ready for us.'

'Anty,' Juan Diego interrupted, 'what's your name?'

'My name is Anna. You may come inside the nest if you allow me to invite you in; the queen must be overly concerned.'

'Ok. Let's go!'

The ant, Anna, smiled while speaking; she had a soft and delicious voice. Every time she said something, Juan Diego and Federico felt a warming sensation all over their bodies, and they laughed.
The three of them started walking towards the anthill.

'And your names are…?'

'My name is Juan Diego.'

'My name is Federico.'

When Federico finished saying his name, they heard an acute melody like a long-faltering whistle approaching.

'What is it? What is that?' Juan Diego inquired.
'Don't be scared.' The gentle Anna answered, 'It's a cricket jumping this way.'

The ant's voice gave them infinite tranquillity.
Federico remembered he had caught several crickets the day before and had them all in a jar underneath his bed.
They continued walking. The cricket chirp was getting closer and closer. Unexpectedly, felt a wingbeat; the blades of grass moved thunderously, and an enormous green animal fell next to them.

'Quiet!' Anna exclaimed.

'Hello.' the cricket greeted, breathing slowly and staggering on the grass blades.

Juan Diego and Federico had never seen such a big and terrifying animal before. It had long, long whiskers that moved with its every breath. Its eyes were two bright moons staring.

'How are you?' Anna, the gentle, asked.

'Feeling very much miserable.' the cricket replied.

'Why so?'

'Yesterday,' it began saying, 'there was a boy collecting crickets in the field only to let them die inside a jar. I've managed to save myself, but he took all my family with him, and now I'm entirely alone; I'm searching for someone to talk to and not die of sadness.'

Dad noticed that David had fallen asleep.

'Listen, frog,' he said, 'tomorrow, you'll finish telling us your story.'

The frog remained silent. Dad removed it from his hand and placed it on David's pillow. He wrapped it up. Then, he removed David's glasses so he wouldn't sleep wearing them, picked up his book, and laid down to continue reading. Then the rucksack frog rose in the air and started flying towards every bed of every kid in the world to blow into their eyes and feed off their dreams.


Stories to Dream


The book Dad was reading had a green cover with a yellow dot like the sun and a title of the same yellow: Stories to Be Happy.
On page seventeen, he read the following:

There was a sweet woman who belonged to a royal family, so by the time of marriage, she'd have to give to her parents' will. Confined to the luxurious rooms of the tall tower, she had grown up stargazing through the window. When she turned fifteen, she saw a gardener approaching from the distance, who turned rocks into flowers and made the wind sing the most beautiful tunes. Her heart fell in love with the gardener, who was as cute and affectionate as morning dew drops. And from the window, she saw how he colored the land with flower beds upon every step. So, she grabbed her bed sheets and made with them a long braid from which she climbed down to follow her beloved gardener.

While Dad was reading, David started dreaming, and this was his dream:

Running through a forest with infinite trees shouting at him:

'Run, David, you must get there on time! Run!'

David ran, feeling the trees were his brothers. Suddenly, he stopped when facing a lignum vitae tree with purple flowers that kneeled before him, saying:

'David, your father is in danger, and only you can save him. You must go to the great lake and extend out the branch of the pine tree so that he's unharmed.' David ran and ran. The trees kept yelling at him:

'Don't stop, don't stop!'

Swiftly, in front of him, he saw an immense lake colored with golden water, and next to his feet, he met a branch telling him:
'I am the pine branch; throw me into the water.'

It was a long, super-long branch that weighed less than a sheet of paper. David threw it into the water in the center of the lake. The branch had just fallen when a frog jumped out of the water and clung to a branch. David started pulling; the branches and the trees shouted at him:

'Fast, fast!'

When the frog was about to find safety, a twenty-meter-long cricket appeared, overflying the lagoon. When it stood beside David, the frog had already turned into Dad, and the pine branch into a wall of flowers defending them.
The cricket was forced to stop, and Dad said:

'Let's go together; your mother is in danger.'

David extended his hand so that Dad would hold him, and they ran while the trees applauded with their branches along with their steps.
They arrived at a castle in the middle of the forest, and Dad picked up David so he could go through a small window on one of the sides of the wall. Inside, David walked down the stairs and opened the door for Dad to enter.
Together, they went all over the spacious room, descended the stairs, and opened doors to reach the basement where, in a cell, Mom was kept prisoner. As soon as they found her, David hugged and kissed her, and right there, he woke up with a smile drawn on his lips.

The bedroom was quite dark, but it was a brand-new day already.


An Industrious Reconstruction
A Wedding Party


David woke up and walked toward his parents' bed. To one side, Mom was peacefully sleeping; to the other, Dad was with the green book on his chest, mouth open, snoring like an ogre.

'Mommy, mommy,' David called out, shaking Mom softly.

She opened her eyes and told him:

'Lie here,' and made up space for him in bed.

David laid down, but just as his mom readjusted herself to fall back asleep, he said:

'I'm hungry; I want bread.'

Dad kept on snoring without waking.

'Luis, Luis,' Mom called; 'the kid wants bread.'

The green book slid down his chest and fell on the floor. Then he opened his eyes.

'What?'

'Give him some bread.'

'Fine.'

Dad picked up the book, put it on the night table, and walked with David toward the kitchen. Anyone could hear the disordered breathing and snoring coming from the bedrooms of those still asleep.
Nobody had woken up yet. They entered the kitchen. David opened the fridge so Dad could take out the bread and the butter. The coffee maker was plugged in. They served coffee with milk, and when David saw that Dad was going back to bed, he proposed:

'Tell the frog to tell me the story now.'

'Ok.'

They went out to the meadow, sat under the pine trees, and from there, the story went on:

The cricket, seeing that neither the ant Anna nor his new friends could do anything to remedy his loneliness, said goodbye with a chirp. It was a fading, fading cry of sorrow.
They continued their way through the woods. As they approached the anthill, they began to find large pieces of burnt paper that turned into ashes at the touch. They climbed a high rock from where they saw the anthill in turmoil: hundreds of ants coming and going; first, carrying a larva, then a lump, erecting a wall here, opening a passage there.

'Look, Kike' Juan Diego said and started clapping and stomping, shouting joyfully.

'Those are lots of ants!' Federico said while reminiscing about that afternoon when his mother had taken them downtown; the corners rapidly clustered up with a crowd of eager people running and crossing from all sides.

'What are those white worms?' Juan Diego asked.

'They are larvae,' The gentle Anna replied. 'Out of them, the new ants are born.'

They saw many entries and caves all over the hill of soil. Anna, the gentle, chose one of them.

'Let's go this way.' she spoke.
Having several advanced steps inward, Federico remembered the highway's tunnel; to hear his echo, Juan Diego screamed like he always cried when entering the tunnel. Ants were busy in the reconstruction and passed by incessantly; they greeted and continued.
Just as they went out of the hall's mouth, they found themselves in the middle of the nest, in the exact place where their footprints lay, among ashes and unburnt pieces of paper. The larvae and the corpses had been gathered and taken to the underground pantries. And they were now running the reconstruction and food collection.

'Bring up the ground!' the Queen ordered. 'Repair the roads and the rooms!'

Guided by Anna, Juan Diego, and Federico suddenly started working. The ants would touch them with their antennae when passing as if they had a lengthy conversation. One of them told the boys:

'Prepare yourselves. There will be a party. A new queen will get married and leave in search of her own nest.'

Juan Diego clapped when receiving the news.

'Kike!' he told his brother. 'A party, hooray!'

The Queen, much bigger than the rest, had run to their bedrooms, and a large group of subjects followed her, licking her permanently. The Queen was sweating, and they absorbed her sweat.

'Bring the guests!' she ordered.

Anna drove Federico and Juan Diego closer to the Queen's room.

'Here they are, Your Majesty!'

The hexagonal lounge was decorated with beautiful paintings of ants on the field that hung from the columns; the floors were covered with rugs and skirted with flowers.
The Queen, clean and serene, had sat on her throne, a tiny chair-shaped orchid.
Juan Diego didn't stop clapping and stomping.

'Kike, look at the Queen.'

'Welcome, friends!' the Queen greeted with her lady's voice; 'bring lots of honey and attend to the guests!'

Juan Diego and Federico looked around everywhere. The Queen didn't know what to tell them. And Anna, the gentle one, had hidden behind the column to laugh so deliciously that the rugs wanted to rise and the paintings unnail themselves.
Through the seven doors in the lounge, seven black ants with heavy bags on the back of their bodies appeared; they oversaw storing the most delicious nectar from flowers inside those bags for times of shortage or special celebrations. All seven of them came to the center; they bowed and said at once:

'We ask permission from Your Majesty to provide our sweet nectar.'

The Queen lowered one of her antennae in a signal of approval, and the ants toured the room serving the foodstuff stored in their bodies.

Juan Diego and Federico tasted it; for them, it was sweet and sour at the same time. It was a flavor unknown to them but wonderful.

'I want much, very much of it!' Juan Diego expressed.

'Let the party begin!' said the Queen.

The music of violins started playing, and the gentle Anna sat down in one of the lateral naves and, facing a grand piano, performed several sonatas; to her side, six violinists served her as companions. The music was so soft that everything seemed to be floating, and the smell of flowers was sensed in the air as if the music also were to be smelled.
A young queen appeared, followed by her wooers. Her wings were soft, transparent, with enervations like leaves. She reached the center of the room, bowed before Her Majesty, and started to dance to the rhythm of Anna's and the six violinists' music.

Juan Diego was clapping and stomping. Federico watched. The dancer kept turning, falling on her back, and standing on her head. She hovered around the columns and naves from the enclosure with such grace that the feet of all attendees wanted to start dancing.
The wooers joined the dance, and in a multicolored orgy, they all approached the young queen.
The new queen flew away, leaving the nest when the dance ended. She would find a place, open a hole in the earth with her pincers, and there she would lay her eggs; she would then tear off her wings to feed her larvae, and within days, a brand-new anthill would be there.
Thus, the party ended. Juan Diego and Federico felt sleepy, very sleepy. Seeing they couldn't hold themselves up straight, the gentle Anna invited them to the dorms, where they fell asleep on beds made of flower petals.
And now, my reddish finch, this story's been clinched!

David got frightened, for the story didn't end as the tales Mom and Dad had read in the books.

'But, Froggy, what happened next?' David inquired.

The frog smirked with indifference and answered:

'I don't know what happened with Juan Diego and Federico, but I can tell you another story.'

'Daddy, why doesn't she know what happened to them?'

'Because she doesn't know what's coming next; at this moment, Juan Diego and Federico are sleeping in the anthill. When more things happen, the frog can tell them to you.'

'Okay,' said David at last, 'tell me that other story then.'


A Daisy in Love & the Swordtail Fish


"How delicious is the sun,
how it scorches and warms up my petals,
my stamens, my goblet, and my pistils!"


After breakfast in the meadow, the frog told him a story about whose actions occur in Momma Mercedes' home to Momma Mercedes herself, Yahibe, and Marianela —David's cousins—. The tale concludes that everything grows in the house while Momma Mercedes sleeps.

'But Momma Mercedes is already awake,' David said.

'Sure thing!' Mom, who had stayed with them after bringing their breakfast, replied, 'She wasn't going to stay asleep forever.'

Mom gathered dishes, mugs, and cutlery on the tray. The four of them went inside the house. The frog was left on the bed, next to the clothes, as if resting.
After the bath, no one looked at her, not even by chance.
David went down to the lake with Granny, and Dad ran back in search of the green book.
He caressed the letters of the title Stories to Be Happy; he opened it on page twenty-four and read the following story:

There was one daisy from the garden of daisies, not white nor yellow, almost yellow, almost white, that whenever the sun rose, would shake her petals and sight deep to exclaim:

'How delicious is the sun, how it scorches and warms up my petals, stamens, goblet, and pistils!'

But whenever it rained, she cried:

'How much do I love the rain, how it wets and caresses my petals, stamens, goblet, and pistils!'

Whenever the wind blew, she said:

'Delicious; tasty is the wind that hugs softly like a lover!' She felt like being kissed by the rain and loved all that her eyes saw. She was sixteen years old and single, but she wanted to have a boyfriend.

'Isn't it right that couples kiss and caress, and because of them, the heart jumps inside the chest?' she asked the older daisies.

Someday, on Daisy stepped a beetle that wanted to try her nectar, and she tweezed her eyebrows and curled her eyelashes to impress him. Still, the bug turned around and flew away.

'Don't worry, little Daisy,' a weeping willow used to tell her, who used to pass as a Spanish teacher to brighten up his friends. 'When you least expect it, you'll have a husband; when you least believe it, you'll have a child. You'll see, you'll see!'

Daisy went on living as joyfully as always, but deep in her heart, that shadow of sorrow had set up a tent to live in.
One random afternoon in which Daisy was, as always, taking the sun and contemplating the distant mountains, people came to the garden of daisies for a painting class: the professor and his pupils brought pencils, oil paints, watercolors, canvases, and easels. They scattered and started to paint everything they saw. The professor came close to Daisy and stared at her. Daisy felt afraid like ever before and stood still… very still, waiting to see what the painting professor would do. And the professor stared at her without even blinking. Suddenly, he grabbed a canvas, picked up a pencil, prepared his oil paints, and started painting her.

'How beautiful is the painting professor!' Daisy told herself.

The professor painted her, grabbed her from the plant, and kissed her. She sighed deeply and asked the professor if he wanted to be her boyfriend.

David was lying face down on the guaduas, sticking his head out of the handrails. With one hand, he threw the breadcrumbs he held in the other. A fish, whose long sword was red, yellow, and black; red center, yellow bordering the red, and black bordering the yellow, jumped onto his left hand, aiming to snatch a mouthful of the large piece of bread.

'Hey!' David shouted. 'It's for everybody.'

'I understand,' the swordtail replied, 'but you have fed everyone else already. I didn't feel like eating from the crumbs you were throwing before. I waited. Now it is my turn, and you should know I get the best part. Whenever there's a share-out, the best must be for me.'

David didn't know what to do or how to understand what he'd heard. For an instant, he wished for Dad to be there to ask him, but he quickly forgot about that idea.

'Let's go!' the fish intervened once again. 'Quit standing there like a fool and give me bread.'

'Granny said to crumble it and give it to everybody.'

'You already gave them, you fool. Don't you understand I get the best part? You ought to provide me with the bestest. I am the spoiled one out of all creation; I'm the king. Did you know this, silly boy? I am the king.
All creatures on Earth, the skies, and every place there may be must bow to me, gift me with presents, and respond to my will. Do you understand, fool? I am the King.'

David couldn't understand anything at all. He was looking at the swordtail fish with eyes wide open, perhaps expecting to find in his attitude something that would clarify the situation.

'Do you know how to dance?' he finally asked.

'What are you asking, silly boy,' the fish replied, seriously angry. 'We are talking about bread. Give me that bread; it's mine!'

'Granny said it was for everyone. That's clear!'

'Clear? Don't make me remind you that I'm the king, nor force me to wait longer because I'll get angry, and then we'll have to fight out.'

'Do you know how to sing, perhaps?'

'Dumb, dumber, dumbest!' The fish shouted, flicking the surface. 'Now I must fight you. I will rip your nose apart, fill it with dirt, and put it back in place.'

David laughed at the swordtail's anger. He looked over to the bamboo forest and saw that Granny Nelly was terribly busy taking care of her plants, so he jumped into the lake and turned into a swordtail fish to fight against his furious foe.
Thus began the battle. Down at the bottom, the gossiping unleashed at once:

'There's a fish wearing glasses.'

'And it's fighting!'

'Why?'

'For a piece of bread'

'Against whom?'

'Against big-headed Alonso.'

Granny Nelly, who had felt the first dip, started approaching the lake and heard a ladyfish telling her husband:
'Imagine this youth fighting over a piece of bread.'

Since David wasn't standing on the bridge, she thought he was in trouble and picked up a basket to start fishing. She looked for a comfortable place on the bridge, began to submerge, and pulled out the basket carefully, allowing the water to drop to examine the fish that remained jumping at the bottom.

With the first throw, she pulled out two young swords that, not even in the waterless basket, would want to separate from one another.

'Who are you guys? What are you up to? Why are you blushing up when I fish you? Say it fast!'

'We know nothing,' said the youngster; 'There's a fight somewhere in the lake, but we don't know anything. We took advantage of the commotion to kiss.'

Granny Nelly returned the couple to their park and scanned from above the surface. When she spotted a huddle, she submerged the basket softly; this time, she found it filled with fighters and curious fishes. Even a hated swordtail took over the fight, to whom Granny paid little attention. After a quick look at the bottom of the basket and among the crowd, she recognized David's glasses.

'David!' She called him out with conviction.

David was frightened and left the fight to turn back on himself.

'Let's go now; we still have to grab lunch before leaving,' she told him, returning the other fish to the lake.


A Return Journey, Two Lost Kids, & the Carrier's Story


"You are the only typing --achine
that I've loved in --y life.
There's no --achine whose print
can be co--pared with yours."


After a hasty lunch, Granny gave orders to return to the city:

'Pack the legumes! Close the windows! Turn off the lights!'

Her voice sounded like a drum beating regularly:

'Wash the dishes. Clean up the cupboards. Pick up the leftovers. Take out the trash. Don't forget the bottle box! Start the engines!'

Everybody but David was busy. He was trying to play with some abandoned darts sitting on the grass. Minutes later, everything was ready, and they said goodbye to the farm for that weekend. They arrived at the society of yellow buildings. It was seven o'clock in the evening. Dad was coming with the overnight bag clung to one shoulder, walking on the sidewalk from the parking lot to the flat; on his head, he carried a basket of legumes. The church bells began ringing. Mom opened the common door, and David helped her by holding it while everyone entered. When they unloaded inside, they heard concerned voices outside.

'What's happening?' Mom asked and stood to wait by the door because she felt the voices approaching.
Dad finished unpacking the things and went directly to the TV.

'What's happening?' Liliana asked again when sensing voices behind the door.

'Can you believe this?' Nelida replied — she was blowing her nose with a handkerchief, tears rolling down her cheeks —. 'Would you believe that Juan Diego and Federico are lost? They said they would slay some ants, and now they are nowhere to appear.'
David understood what was happening and decided to call for them without telling anyone. He went out through the legs of those who were with Nelida. He got to the lawn, crossed the row of eucalyptus and willow trees, and looked, before the wire mesh, for the anthill.

'Here it is,' he told himself and knelt: 'Federico! Juan Diego!' he shouted, leaning close to the ground so they could hear him.

On the beds made of flower petals inside the anthill, Juan Diego and Federico heard the voice that woke them up, rumbling all over the place as if the wind pronounced their names.

'Kike!' Juan Diego said, 'Someone's calling us.'

'Oh, my dear!' Federico replied. 'We overslept.'

'Let's go; let's get out of here!' Juan Diego proposed, and they started running through the tunnels.

In the anthill, everything was quiet; the ants seemed to rest after the party; Juan Diego and Federico ran, saying goodbye to those they found along the way. The gentle Anna came out from a small lounge to meet them.

'Are you leaving?'

'Someone's calling us,' Juan Diego replied hastily.

'Farewell then.'

They moved away, looking back to wave goodbye from a distance.
David continued kneeling in front of the anthill, shouting their names, when he saw them exit through a small hole in the ground. Juan Diego had the green, red, and white striped shirt, and Federico wore the yellow shirt, which looked like a tiny dot when David understood it was them and not two other ants.

'Juan Diego!' he told them, 'Your mom is crying because you are lost.'
'See, Kike, do you see!'

And they started to grow back into their regular sizes.

'How funny!' David told them.

The three walked toward the apartment building, went up the lawn, crossed the sidewalk, and, at the door, heard a scream:

'There they come, look!' cried Nelida, their mother, when seeing them — this time of joy —. 'Where were you?'

'What has happened is that we've turned small, very tiny, and have fallen asleep in an anthill. That was so cool, Mommy, so cool!' Federico — who was thinking about liberating the crickets he kept inside the jar to bring happiness back to their friend — answered.

They all started to climb the stairs to the fifth floor.

'David, you go inside!' Mom ordered when realizing he wanted to follow the rest.

David entered the bedroom. The TV was on, but Dad wasn't watching it. Instead, lying on the bed, he read the green book.

'Daddy,' he said without getting a response.

He called him three more times, but his dad continued to read. David shook him up and began to tell him what had happened, although his father seemed mesmerized by the book, reading on page thirty-one the following story:

Gildardo works as the school carrier. He must be punctual at 6:35 in the morning to pick up the high school secretary's typewriter that, on account of thieves, he keeps inside the school's security room every night.
At 6:30 every morning, one can spot him outside the door with his transistor radio under the arm, listening to the news as the aperitif for the day and the dessert for breakfast.
After installing his bike in one of the corners of the parking lot, he pulls out a handful of keys, which, judging by its overwhelming amount, can weigh around fourteen kilos and two hundred grams. He chooses that which corresponds to the security room, introduces it in the lock, turns it twice, pushes the door, and, before his eyes, as a queen covered with its grey percaline dress, is the Secretary's typewriter, executive model, color: royal blue.
From the first instant he saw it, Gildardo fell in love with it. Initially, the machine ignored him entirely, but he — with his infinite patience — successively gained its affection. First, he learned to plug it carefully so as not to cause an electric shock that could disturb it; later, he learned to remove its percaline dress gently and to caress it delicately in such a tender way that the machine would get goosebumps. And its ribbon would go out of tune. However, he never exaggerated with his caresses. In turn, the typewriter gradually fell in love, slowly but steadily. Now, after contemplating it for a few instants, he leans closer and asks the roller in secret:

'How are you this morning?'

And he lifts it with his happy carrier strong hands, transports her on his shoulder, and walks through the school's empty hallways toward the Principal's office, where he unloads it on the Secretary's desk, uncovers it, and plugs it. He then takes out a sheet of paper, introduces the sheet of paper in the typewriter, and starts typing beautiful phrases like: "You are the only typing --achine that I've loved in --y life." or "There's no --achine whose print can be co--pared with yours."
The typewriter's happiest five minutes of the day are, in fact, those spent with Gildardo when nobody comes. After those five minutes, Gildardo rolls out the paper, tears it, throws the pieces in the trash, and walks away, waving goodbye to his typewriter in love.


A Paper Plane Is Born


'Okay, now it's fine,' Dad told David as soon as he finished reading. 'What were you trying to say?'

David didn't hesitate to tell him everything that had happened outside while he read. Dad smiled as he listened. Often, he said:

'Uh-huh!'

Finally, David said:

'Ask the frog to tell me a story now.'

'She can't because she went to blow into kids' heads, so they sleep and have dreams.'

David remembered the paper block that was on the dining table.

'Can you make me a paper plane?' he asked.

Without pronouncing a word, Dad walked toward the table, tearing a paper sheet and folding it.

'Make it pointy!' David said.

Dad left the airplane, finished on the same table, and walked toward the bedroom.

'Is it good?' David asked.

'This plane can travel in time,' Dad replied crustily and continued his way.

David picked the plane up and went after his father. When he reached the bedroom, Dad had already removed his clothes and was lying wrapped in the bedspread.


The Frog Is Lost

The day's clarity penetrated through the window, invading David's room.
When he opened his eyes, he confirmed that the curtains were half closed, so the room was lit. The curtain was blue, with colored stamps of Snow White on one of the pleats and her legs on the other, next to the tiny house or beside one of the dwarves' bodies.
When David felt awake, he thought about the plane he hadn't had time to fly the previous night. He recalled leaving it on Mom's nightstand, next to the rucksack frog and began running toward Mom and Dad's bedroom.
Mom was sleeping peacefully on the right side of the bed. On the opposite side was the space Dad had left when he had left for work an hour before. David reached the nightstand, and indeed, there was the plane. He then grabbed it to go out and play with it, but when he got to the door, David realized he hadn't seen the frog where it should have been, so he went back and verified it.
He picked up the blankets, looked on the bed beside Mom, and found nothing. He then ran back to his room, going through the rugs on the floor, but again, nothing. He went back to the bedroom and called Mom:

'Mommy, mommy! Froggy's lost. I've lost her!'

'We'll look for it later,' Mom answered somnolently.

'I already have, and it is not; it's not there!'

David started crying definitively, awakening Mom, who got up, rambled around the house, moved chairs, tossed beds, emptied baskets, turned everything upside down, and put it back right without finding the frog until, finally, she decided to go back to sleep for a while, and finished by saying:

'If it's going to show up, it'll come when we least expect it.'

In contrast, David, who had cried the whole time upon seeing his mom giving up the search, decided to find it by his means.


Searching for the Frog With No Teeth

David took the paper plane and went to the meadow.

'We are leaving,' he said. And he got on the plane, which, despite its size, started to rise, taking him with it. 'Let's fly, Friend,' David told the plane and the aircraft obeyed him by rising and rising.

David looked down and saw the roofs of all the city's houses and buildings; he looked back, and the yellow apartment buildings were shrinking as he gained altitude.
No sooner had he flown for a few seconds than he discovered a beautiful flower-shaped cloud resembling a treetop before him. Down, as if growing in the air, increasingly, there were biflora plants of all colors.

'Let's come closer, Friend!' David told his plane, which faithfully obeyed him.

They arrived at the cloud, where his cousins Marianela, Yahibe, Carolina, and Marcela played around the branches and the white cloud flakes.

'GIRLS!' Yahibe shouted, — but now her voice wasn't tiny, nor were there ice cubes falling from her mouth when speaking— 'There comes David flying a paper plane.'

They all ran to greet him.

'Do you want to play hide and seek with us?' Marcela, the smallest of them, asked him.

'I can't.'

'Why so?' Carolina spoke.

'Because I'm looking for my frog with no teeth; I've lost it.'

'Why don't you ask Momma Mercedes' Marcela recommended him. 'If you like, leave the plane here so I'd keep it safe while you're down there.'

'Okay,' he answered. And he got off and started climbing down the biflora branches, feeling the fresh air from the house.

All that remained of the house of biflora was that natural stairway from the patio to the cloud.
David reached the floor and went directly to the kitchen.

'Granma!' he shouted.

'What is it, my dear son!' Momma Mercedes replied from the kitchen as she kneaded and prepared arepas for breakfast.

When he heard her voice, David ran toward her, and Momma knelt to receive him with open arms. They embraced and kissed one another.

'Granny, why are you so wrinkled?'

'Because I'm too old, but instead, look! Two biflora flowers have grown on my glasses.'

'Apply some cream like Granny Nelly so you don't get wrinkles.'

'Very cute, good grief!' Momma Mercedes said. 'Do you want some coffee with milk?'

'Yes! Momma… I'm looking for my frog with no teeth.'

'What happened to it?'

'I lost her.'

Momma Mercedes remained silent while she made a cup of coffee.

'I don't know,' she said as she walked toward the fridge, searching for the milk.

'Marcela said you would.'

'Perhaps, if you go into the Pandeazucar's grotto and manage to talk to Don Ernest, you'll come to know, but for that, you have to tour around the hillock for seven turns, stand to face the cave that is in the middle, and repeat three times:

"Dear Potato Peel
And a stick of yucca.
How can we reveal
The crag Pandeazucar."


Don Ernest, the Master

"(…) he had to walk for a long stretch to find
the completely illuminated enclosure to which
you step down a golden stairway...
It was a large room built on clay columns.
In the middle, there was a boiling cauldron (…)."

David received the coffee with milk, which he drank in a gulp without breathing.

'Goodbye, Momma,' he said as he gave her back the empty cup to run to the courtyard and climb the biflora plants up to the cloud, where Marcela was sitting down, looking after his plane.

'I have to go!' He said once he reached her.

'Does this plane fly fast?' Marcela asked.

'Hmm… it flies super-fast!'

Marcela got off the plane so David could get on it. The others stuck their heads between the cloud flakes, and David said goodbye.

'Let's go, Friend!' he told his plane.

The plane thought David had given him this name and felt glad to know so.

'You want to name me Friend, right?' It asked him to be sure.

'Yes, it's your name,' David responded. 'Let's go to the Pandeazucar!'

Friend made a slight pirouette and headed toward the hillock.

'Seven laps around!' David requested once he felt flying over the Pandeazucar.

The plane obeyed.

"Dear Potato Peel
And a stick of yucca.
How can we reveal
The crag Pandeazucar."

Three times, he chanted the spell and saw how a rock, slightly covered with dirt, began to move, opening the entrance to a dark grotto through which barely could fit one person.

'Come a little closer,' David begged Friend.

At the grotto's entrance, he got off the plane.

'Wait for me,' he said and stepped inside. He could see absolutely nothing, and space was too narrow; he had to crouch and fumble his way.

The grotto had the shape of a spinning tunnel, twirling from right to left in the dark. David started to feel scared and tried to reverse his way, but he saw it was equally dark to his back.
Having traversed a few more meters, he made out the twinkling light at the end against the wall of what appeared to be a room. He had to walk for a long stretch to find the wholly illuminated enclosure to which you step down on a golden stairway from the tunnel's mouth through which he came. It was a large room built on clay columns. In the middle, there was a boiling cauldron.
David stepped on the first tread and heard a bell. How funny! He thought. He took another step, and the bell rang again when he put his foot down; so, he took two steps, and the bell rang twice. With a smile, he kept walking down and discovered that the sound showed different tones according to the tread he stepped on.
When he reached the floor, he went back fast to hear it again while going up and down another time. He was listening to the sounds when he saw someone watching him and went toward him.

He was an old man, much older than Momma Mercedes. He had utterly white hairlocks showing under his cap. He laughed and had his teeth wide apart from each other. He wore a white Dacron shirt with grey cloth trousers and a grey jacket, but you could tell he had been wearing the same clothes for many days now. On his face, some white sticks of beard appeared in disorder.

'Who are you?' David asked.

'I'm Don Ernest, the master. I worked for 36 years in the Boyaca School and retired 17 years ago. Since then, I've been working here as the guardian of the source of knowledge.'

'Momma Mercedes told me you know where I can find the frog with no teeth I've lost.'

'But of course!' Don Ernest replied. This cauldron is the source of knowledge. Whoever drinks its vapors can understand the mysteries of life and death. Through it, you can know it all. Come, show me your right hand!'

David stretched his hand over the cauldron, and as he got closer, he felt the scent of jasmine, but this time it seemed imbued throughout his body.

'You'll find your frog,' Don Ernest, the master, said. 'However, before, you must complete three tasks: First, you must help Princess Love find her gardener, whom she is looking for desperately; second, help Daisy find her happiness; and third, fight against the Typewriter's charm so it can marry Gildardo, the happy carrier. Upon completing these three tasks, go to the Nutibara Mount with this hair lock, which belongs to Seon the Wizard, and that, when burnt, will bring back your frog.'

Don Ernest pulled out a long, white hair from one of the interior pockets of his jacket and handed it over to David.

'Thank you so much!' David said.

'Don't go losing Seon's hairlock because you won't be able to find your frog otherwise.'

David took the hair and kept it in his trousers pocket.

'Goodbye!' David told Don Ernest, the master, and walked up the stairway where he heard the Bells' song again. He walked through the passage, fumbling the walls to the end where the rock had already closed. Then, he repeated the chant three times:

'Dear Potato Peel
And a stick of yucca.
How can we reveal
The crag Pandeazucar.'

The rock moved toward the outside, and there, at the door, his loyal Friend awaited him.

'Let's go, Friend!' David told him as he climbed. 'We have obligations to fulfill. We must find Princess Love.'


Princess Love

Friend, the paper plane, rose over the city. In the back was the Pandeazucar, and beneath them, the houses, buildings, cars on the streets, people rushing on the corners, the mountains…
As they left the city, Friend kept rising until, looking down, only a spacious layout of clouds they could see.

Did Dad build a stereo on this airplane? David asked himself. It would be great to listen to music, so I don't feel so lonely. And Friend understood. I have a stereo, and the way it answered was that way of communication in which words aren't needed. I want some music, then, David thought, and at once, music was heard, so delicate it seemed to become joyful figures in mid-air. It's the same song from the stairway, he acknowledged, feeling Friend's thoughts smile.
They had been flying for a while when Friend began to descend. A gentle wind touched David's body, lifting the tips of his hair as if it were a game, and whistled in his ears as if bringing a distant moan. When traversing the broad laying of clouds, David saw a prairie crossed by a river, with banks from which trees of large branches arose.
Friend descended, forming circles in the air.

Why have we come here? David reflected.
I don't know. I don't drive myself; it's as if we were on our corresponding path, but we know nothing; the plane thought a response and continued: We're here; we don't know why, but we're here.
Fool! David thought, of course, we're here.

They were going to start a discussion when they were interrupted by the approaching crying sound.
David looked toward the grove from where the crying was approaching and saw how an unusually tall woman appeared before him but still with a girl's face; her eyebrows curled like a dove's quaff, and her lips smiled, although her eyes were weeping.

'Why are you crying?'

'I'm not crying,' the woman replied. It's just that tears come down my right eye.

She put her hands on her face to wipe her eyes with his fingertips. Then, she asked David:

'Have you seen a gardener passing by who makes the wind sing the most beautiful songs and turns rocks into flowers?'

'No,' David replied. He took off his glasses and stretched out his forehead toward the woman to tell her:

'Can you clean them for me?'

She received them and wiped the edges with her maroon shirt. Meanwhile, she asked:

'What do you do around here?'

'I'm looking for the frog with no teeth I've lost, but before, I must find Princess Love to help her find her gardener, how funny! It's as if everybody was looking for the same.'

'I'm Princess Love!' She screamed, jumping for joy, but soon she serenaded and leaned down to put the glasses on David.

She started caressing his face while glancing at him up and down. It was a glance of love.

'My name is David, and his name is Friend.'

'Why does your plane have music, it being of paper?

'Because my dad built it with a stereo, but it only comes with one song. It doesn't matter. I like it a lot.'

'It's Ode to Joy,' Princess Love said. 'I used to listen to it in the tower while stargazing. A violinist in the palace knew how to play it very well.'


The Sad Gardener's Tale

"(…) he lives to find the rocky roads and leave them
with a trail of flowers as he goes. If this is
the country of stone, eventually, he'll
arrive here to make it soft and
beautiful with his hands."

'Now, what do we do?' David asked.

'I don't know,' Princess Love responded.

But Friend, who had remained silent playing Ode to Joy, thought: Get on and get going. David understood his thinking and approached the princess:

'Carry me.'

She picked him up in her arms without saying a word.

'Now get on the plane because we're leaving.'

Friend slightly arose so the Princess would see that despite being small, he could take them anywhere in time or space.
Princess Love lifted one foot over Friend as if mounting a horse, and they started to fly.
David felt content. With his fingertips, he tried to tickle Princess Love to see her smile.

'Watch out; we might fall.'

'Nobody falls from here, you fool! Hurray! We're going to pass through the clouds. Do you know what clouds are?'

'Yes.'

'What are they?'
'Well, clouds.'

'No, you fool; there was a man with a fabric factory to whom his machinery broke down, so out of anger, he started throwing the cotton toward the sky.'

'You moron!' said Princess Love with a smile all over her face. She seemed to be laughing her whole body.

The trip ended up being so entertaining that they didn't even notice when Friend descended into an extraordinary place where everything was made of rocks. There were trees, but the trees were rocks; it had a river, but the river was of stone; it had grass, but the grass was of sand; there were roads, but the streets were gravel.
Softly, Friend descended:

'Now I know why we're here,' Princess Love said.

'Why?'

'Because this is the gardener's destiny; he lives to find the rocky paths and leave them with a trail of flowers as he goes. If this is the country of stone, eventually, he'll arrive here to make it soft and beautiful with his hands.'

She hadn't finished saying these words when they heard a harmonious melody in the wind.

'It's him; it's him!' Princess Love reacted, 'Whenever he approaches, the air sings. I've finally found you, my beloved gardener!'

In the distance came a sad-looking man, leaving behind the numerous colorful flowers combed by the wind. Princess Love felt so happy; she couldn't resist the urge to clap and stamp her feet on the ground as if running in the same spot. In the same way, when the gardener was close, she tried to kiss him, but he stopped her with a scream:

'Stop! Don't come any closer.
'What's happening to you? Why have you fled from me when you know that I love you and that I left my castle, with great regret from my parents, only to follow you?'

'I know, but don't come any closer to me for your own sake.'

'I don't believe this. You don't do any harm. Can a man who brightens the landscape with his presence do any damage?'

'I, myself, am evil.'

The gardener was so sad that whenever he pronounced a word, you could feel something tearing up inside him; instead, his presence inspired tranquillity, and one was plunged into a daydreaming state.

'I don't care about who you are or what you do or don't do. I love you. Everything I want is to have you and for you to love me.' Princess Love told him.

'I also want you and my whole being shattered because of my love for you. Difficult is not to love you, but you must turn away from me; understand this!' he replied.

'At least tell me why.' she requested him.

'Because I carry with me the mark of misfortune. Everyone who loves me suffers eternally; it has always happened this way; if my hands touch anyone, their suffering starts at once.'

'I don't believe it; I don't believe you! Touch me so that I can prove it through my experience.'

'Fine then,' the gardener answered. 'You've wanted it this way.'

He came close to her; his eyes were the eyes of sorrow, while hers were of love.
Both saw their souls in the other's eyes. Both found their joy in the other's hearts. They kissed, and nothing terrible happened. On the contrary, they both felt happy and delighted.
David gazed at the scene silently; he boarded his airplane and parted fast.


The Painting Professor

"It was the city of painters.
Friend descended on a narrow street
and penetrated through
a vinyl window on cardboard."

Friend landed in a pine forest.
David deboarded and started walking, trying to find out where they were and what story they were living now. On his memory, still alive, were the gardener's eyes of sorrow and the Princess's eyes of love. He was thinking of them when he heard a little voice yelling at him:

'LISTEN, KID… COME CLOSE!'

He looked everywhere, but all he could see were pines in the forest. There seemed to be a garden, and within a few steps, he found a small natural spring.

'Who's calling at me?'

'Hey, kid…Come here!'

It was an acute and loose voice; it seemed to come from the spring.

'WHO CALLS AT ME!' David screamed.

'It's me; come closer.'

It was coming from the water. David walked up to it and asked:

'What's going on?'

'Oh! You came. Finally, someone can take this rock away from me! What a joy!' the water said.

David was contemplating the water's hair, eyes, and lips, which faint and soon ran down the stream to recreate themselves at the source that sprung from the soil.

'Help me, please!' the water pled, 'This rock on top of me rolled down the slope to stop right where I spring out from the earth, and it's hindering my exit; if you remove it, I could move freely. You must know that I am constantly emerging.'

David leaned close to the stream and moved the rock, impeding the springing of the waters.

'Aaah!' The water relieved, feeling grateful.

David kept walking until exiting the forest. He found himself in a daisies' garden when crossing a minor road. He leaned forward before a daisy that had been pulled out and left on the ground. A tear rolled down each of her —almost white, almost yellow— petals.

'What's wrong, little Daisy?'

'Ow...!' Daisy replied inconsolably, 'A painter came to paint me and pulled me out to kiss me. I thought he wanted to be my boyfriend, but he left me stranded here, taking his oil paints and canvases. Now, all I do is yearn for him. How happy would I be if he returned!'

'Let's go!' David said, 'Friend will take us to his house.'

He grabbed Daisy and entered the forest with her, where Friend awaited him. When passing by the spring, he leaned over to drink so that Daisy would as well.
They arrived where Friend was, and after a brief introduction, they started flying.

'What a beautiful melody you've got there! It wraps up my petals, stamens, goblet, and pistils,' Daisy said, and Friend felt proud.

At times, Daisy would ask David, sobbing:

'Why doesn't he love me?'

Since David didn't know how to respond, he preferred to remain silent.
Soon, they found themselves in an entire city of beauty because the mountains surrounding it were not mountains of soil and grass and rocks and trees.
Still, mountains of all shapes and colors were painted on canvases with birds overflying the acrylic, oil, and vinyl skies. The buildings, the streets, the street lighting, the capriciously shaped houses, the street animals, the dust, the sun, the clouds, everything; everything was painted in bright and cheerful colors. It was the city of painters.

Friend descended on a narrow street and penetrated through a vinyl window on cardboard. Silently, he landed on a classic desk, painted in detail with oil on wood.
They came across a man drinking bottles of brandy in the living room, crying and contemplating, on an easel, a surrealist painting that, with absolute certainty, was Daisy's portrait.

'I'm a coward, a coward!' the man reproached himself, 'Why did I abandon you, my sweet, beautiful Daisy, neither white nor yellow!'

The man cried without noticing the presence of the three visitors.
Daisy couldn't believe what her eyes were seeing nor what her ears were hearing, not even what her nose breathed or petals touched.

'He likes me; he likes me!' she told herself, 'He's crying for me. Hurray, hurray, hurray!'

David understood it was time to leave because he'd started to feel bored with so many love stories, and he wanted the frog with no teeth to tell him a story that would make him laugh and laugh with no rest.


A Letter Is a Problem


Friend played over and over Ode to Joy without caring whether he was on the ground or in the air.
Again, they caught themselves flying over the clouds as if Friend were a horse and not a paper plane, and the clouds were the earth, not clouds.
David felt too tired and wanted to be home having a carrot and beetroot milkshake for breakfast or having a piece of that chocolate cake Mom bakes over the weekends, which can last up to eight days on top of the fridge.

We can't go back, thought Friend to cheer him up. Remember that we're only one adventure away from finding the frog with no teeth. If you come to lose her, you'll never hear stories alike ever again.

David accepted loathly. Instead, I would wash my hair with shampoo or have it taken to the ear doctor, responded inside his mind. Nevertheless, David had to continue; he couldn't go back. Thus, he reflected when they began to descend onto a school's parking lot. David recognized his teacher, Adriana, heading toward the classroom with a group of kids.

Friend landed next to the flagpoles, and David understood he had to run to the high school offices, where, undoubtedly, he would find the Secretary's typewriter to finish the quest for the last time. Wait for me, Friend! Thought David as he went onto the sidewalk from the parking lot to the central corridor.

'What's happening, David?' Manira asked when she saw him arrive.

Manira is the High School Secretary; she has a white face and a pointed nose; she laughs like an old lady but with cute expressions in her eyes.

'Excuse me,' David replied, 'I have to fix a problem; I'm in a rush.'

He walked directly toward the typewriter and asked:

'What's going on? What should I do for you? How can I fix your problem? Tell me fast.'

The typewriter wrote on the paper it had at the moment: "Ha! It looks as if your sleep was scared away."
Since David didn't know how to read, he had to call Manira to help him. When she read the message out loud, she rebuked:

'Foolish machine!'

The typewriter typed: "Ha ha ha." --anira hastened to read.

'Okay.' David said, 'Tell me then, what should we do for you?'

The typewriter typed again:

"I belong to a group of executive --achines built in 1975. Within the next year, we were i--ported to Colo--bia. We traveled by ships from the Flota --ercante Grancolo--biana, packed up in cardboard boxes, but five days before arriving in Cartagena de Indias, a storm rocked the ship and knocked down the box in which I came. Because of the hit --y letter e-- got damaged. At first, you couldn't notice it really. Still, after being used, it deteriorated utterly, and now I won't be able to --arry Gildardo, the happy carrier, until I've solved that proble--. I want to --arry in perfect condition or never ever --arry at all."

Manira read, adding the em letter in the missing places. Having listened to such a story, David didn't have the remotest idea of what should be done, so he closed his eyes and considered Friend to consult him.

Friend didn't hesitate to respond: We must go to 1976 and make them load the box underneath the ship's storeroom, not on top of the others. That's it.

David smiled when hearing the answer and said:

'Everything will sort out! So long, Manira, Manickles, she who tickles! So long, Typewriter!'
And he left feeling happy that the solution was so simple. In the parking lot, he grabbed Friend and told him: Go on, buddy. Full steam!
Friend was feeling a bit nervous. It was the first time a paper plane prepared to travel in time.
A lot had been said in stories and films about people who would build time machines, but an airplane with the property to fly in space and time had never been seen before.

Nothing wrong would happen to us; David thought of cheering on the plane, but the aircraft decided to pass out from fear. So, David got off, blew it briefly, and straightened its tip.
Friend felt relieved again.
Now, buddy, David thought.

Friend took off until reaching the line of time; he stood in its opposite way, and within an instant, they were at the typewriters' pier of 1976. It landed on the ship Barranquilla City when the dockers carried the typewriters' boxes toward the storerooms.
David recognized the box in which Gildardo's girlfriend was packed because of its position since it was on top of the rest. Still, he didn't know how to alter the loading process's order.

Friend was who understood that hiding the storeroom's keys for some ten minutes would shift the embarking process.
They searched for a way to keep the man in charge of opening the storerooms busy by making some noises behind his back:

'HEY, SAILOR!' David shouted.

The man turned around to see who'd called him, and Friend quickly passed through his fingers, knocking down his handful of keys.
Since the man was a superstitious sailor, he thought he was being hunted and ran toward the prow where there were light and people.
David understood that everything had been resolved because while the man recovered himself and found the storeroom's keys, the necessary changes would take place so that the typewriter — traveling set in a different spot — would arrive entirely safe to the instant in which Gildardo, the happy carrier, proposed her to marry him.


The Frog With No Teeth Returns Home
"The Earth shook, the freezing wind blew
and right there, on a rock next to Friend,
was the frog with no teeth."

Friend picked up the timeline and began traveling in the same direction. It required only a few seconds to reach the present moment, which wise men called the here and now, and that travels precisely at the speed of time without ever stopping.
Toward the Nutibara Mount, David ordered Friend through his thoughts.
Again, they were seen flying over Medellin city on Monday morning. Soon, they reached Nutibara Mount, and after five turns of observation, David discovered he didn't know how to retrieve his frog. But Friend, who was piloted by the wiser among all life and event pilots, Chance, landed on a slight embankment next to the monument to the Mother Mountain and transmitted his thought process to David:

The chosen unparalleled
moment has arrived.
The well-settled
Place and Time.
Please, be seated,
follow what's implied:
Burn in breeze
hair and delight.
Await attentively
looking after advice,
you'll keep gaiety
good well-justified.

Looking to one side, he found a matchbox that a pedestrian had probably lost the day before, only to fulfill how it was supposed to be what was given to happen.
He pulled out Seon's hair, which he kept entangled inside his pocket; he lit a match and brought it closer to the hair. The Earth shook, the freezing wind blew, and right there, on a rock next to Friend, was the frog with no teeth.

'HURRAY!' David shouted.

He grabbed the rucksack, stuck his right hand inside of it, and said:

'What's up, Froggy? Where have you been?'

The frog with no teeth replied:

'That's a long story I will tell you tonight before you sleep.'

Friend played, loud as it could, Ode to Joy, and they all returned home.
When David came in, he discovered that Mom continued sleeping. But she'd soon wake up.

THE END

Luilli 1982-86.
